and four three two one
hello hello Jeff thanks for doing this
man I really appreciate it oh this is
exciting I don't think I've ever had a
conversation as long as we're about to
have I've been listening to the
happiness hypothesis over the last few
days and I really really enjoy it I'm
really enjoying it it's really
fascinating stuff man but one thing I
wanted to talk about because we're
talking about it right before we got
started was what's happening with Peter
Bogosian at Portland State University
yeah for folks who don't know the story
he and I forget his two colleagues
challenged lemon rose and James Lindsay
yeah they released these fake papers on
like homoeroticism and rape culture in
dog parks and just really proprietors
papers that almost like an article from
the onion and some of them not only did
they get peer reviewed and accepted into
these journals but they got loud it as
being these amazing was one did one guy
yeah yeah and now he's getting in
trouble that's right yeah and we were
just talking about it and I just would
love to know your thoughts as a
professor like what oh sure yeah so you
know for those who don't know I guess
most your listeners probably do but you
know it was called the grievance studies
hoax yeah because and and this is one of
the big issues going on in the Academy I
hope I'll talk about is you know what
does it take to have good scholarship
and and the argument is that in some
fields as long as you hate the right
things and use the right words you'll
get published and that's not scholarship
that's activism and so these three these
three people who did this hoax they were
trying to show that that's the case and
so they wrote these papers one of them
was actually a section of mine Kumpf yes
and they just substituted in something
about feminism for Nazism something like
that and I don't remember that one
actually got I think it's it at any rate
the point is they were trying to show
that this is some of these fields in the
academy are not really about scholarship
they're just about showing that you hate
the right things their activism and so
there's no way to break in within those
closed world so they did a time-honored
thing they did a hoax they published
they'd submitted these papers they made
up fake names and and
of them got accepted and now what's
happening is that the universe at
Portland State University which is only
one of the three is that it is a
professor he's assistant professor so
he's not tenured you know of course the
he has a lot of enemies and of course I
don't know what's going on behind the
scenes but it looks like some of them
wanted him investigated for violating
the IRB the internal review board
because the claim is they fabricated
data because one of the paper says I
inspected the genitals of ten thousand
dogs in the dog park you know it's like
obviously absurd yeah and he said you
know in 63 percent of the of the
attempted hump it because the thing the
thing of the article was that the idea
that you know you go to a dog park and
you see dogs humping each other and they
were interpreting this as rape as doggy
rape and so he's got all these enough
you know fake numbers in there so is
that fraud isn't that data fraud and if
you read so I'm writing a letter for a
lot of us are not writing letters in
support of of billion thank you for
doing that but if you read the you know
they at his university committee was
impaneled and they looked at the literal
definition of data fabrication and it's
possible that he does fall under that
but the point of this whole thing is so
it's not like I can't weigh in on
whether or not technically but but these
rules are put in place to prevent the
corruption of the scientific record and
what he was doing was not going to
corrupt the scientific record it was
done to correct it we were doing it to
show that there's a huge problem and
then they were going to unveil it so the
question is is the university going to
interpret it this in the worst possible
in a narrows possible way and thereby
make fools of themselves look like
laughing stocks or are they going to use
some common sense and recognize this for
what it was it wasn't data fabrication
it wasn't a fraud it was an expose
that's right yeah and I hope that they
come to their senses and they do have a
point if I'm going to be completely
objective about data fabrication I mean
technically I mean maybe they could have
written that paper without saying that
they actually tested ten thousand
genitals of you but what's really
important I think is that they recognize
that regular people are paying attend
to this now people that aren't involved
in this very insulated world and they're
going this is crazy like imagine if your
children are going there and your
children children are being taught at
this school that's willing to accept
this kind of nonsense like this what
what happened at Evergreen State
University is another example of that
it's right it's incredibly damaging to
them as a university I mean their their
enrollment is significant on it that's
right their funding is in real big
trouble and it's a real bad situation
for them and if you talk to Brett
Weinstein it was a wonderful place just
a few years ago when he was teaching
there that's right and it's gotten
crazier and crazier on these campuses to
the point where nonsense is never being
is not being questioned at all it's just
being accepted as just some some is it's
almost like some religious dogma that
you have to follow that's right so the
wait I think the way to make sense of
all of this is you have to always look
at what game is being played so human
beings evolved in small-scale societies
we have all kinds of abilities to
function in those small-scale societies
one of those is religious worship we're
very good at making something sacred and
circling around it
another is war we're very good at
forming teams to fight the other side
and we love that so much we create
sports and you know video game battles
with team vs. team so there's all these
different games you can play and the
truth-seeking game is a was a really
special one in a weird one and we're not
very good at it as individuals and in my
view the genius of university is that it
takes people and puts them together in
ways where each person each like
scientists aren't these super rational
creatures that are you know looking to
disconfirm their own ideas no we're not
looking we want to prove our ideas we
love our ideas but a university puts us
together in a way in which you are
really motivated to disprove my ideas
and I'm motivated to disprove yours you
put us together we cancel out each
other's confirmation biases so the
truth-seeking game is a very special
game that can only be played in a very
special institution with special norms
okay so we're doing this for you know my
whole time in academia I started
at school in 1987 at the University of
Pennsylvania and then just in the last
few years it's like some people are
playing this really different game and
it's like if you know if I'm playing
tennis and I hit the ball to you like
we're in a seminar class mm-hmm I give
you a question I challenge you you come
back and we go back and forth and in the
process we learned so that's like kind
of like playing tennis so I'm doing this
and then suddenly like someone tackles
me like what that you don't do that in
tennis no no but they're playing
football you see and in football it's a
much rougher game and you're trying to
destroy the others I'm not really in
football but I'm saying yes you know
it's a and so as norms of combat come in
and what I mean by it is political
combat as some people within
universities see that what we're doing
here is not seeking truth we're trying
to fight fascism or we're trying to
defeat conservatism or we're trying to
fight racism or whatever some sort of
political goal and these games are
completely incompatible and so that's
why this madness has erupted where you
see professors saying something maybe
it's a little provocative I'm going back
to Socrates that was kind of the point
was to provoke and you see these bizarre
reactions emotional reactions groups
organized to demand that a professor be
fired because we're playing different
games yeah how did this start
how did it start because it seems like
there there has to be an event or
something or yeah a trend well so so the
you know the book that the book that I
just put out in September with Greg
Luciana off the coddling of the American
mind yeah I read the first chapter that
as well okay well thank you for
admitting that it was only one chapter
usually driven to that one because the
unfortunately I was reading that and
then I got on a flight and I just wanted
to zone out so I listened to this one on
tape
okay well I'll tell you all about it but
the key thing is that that book that
calling the American mind was something
that we wrote because Greg began
observing this weird stuff happening on
universities in 2014 it all starts in
2014 most of your listeners have heard
about safe spaces microaggressions bias
response teams trigger warnings all that
stuff
that stuff didn't exist before 2014 it
just begins creeping in then and then it
kind of blows up in 2015 and so our
whole book is an exploration of why why
did this happen and so to your question
about was there an event our answer is
there are six different causal threads
there's like all these social trends I'm
going back to the 80s and 90s that came
together around 2014 so that students
are a little different and then there
are certain forces acting on them that
are different and so you get this weird
new game you get this explosive mix you
get some students who are actually very
drawn to grievin studies and so very
briefly like the it's things like rising
political polarization so left and right
never particularly liked each other but
in the 70s and 80s if you look at
surveys done of how much you hate people
on the other side it's not that intense
it begins going up in the in the 80s and
then especially after 2000 it's going up
very steeply at the same time university
faculty who have always leaned left
throughout the 20th century but was only
a lean and in the 90s it begins shifting
much further left so that now Faculty's
especially in the social sciences and
Humanities are pretty purified they're
overwhelmingly on the left so you have a
more left-leaning university at a time
when left-right hostility is getting
more and more intense and so any
question that has a political valence
now there's a lot more people who want
to do the football game not the
truth-seeking game and then we got to
defeat the other side don't give me
nuance don't give me data we know what
we believe and damn it we're gonna you
know so you got this changing political
situation and then you've got a couple
of threads about what we've done to kids
so and they've got this is a whole
nother area conversation for us but we
basically took away free play and gave
them social media the same basically
kids were born in 1995 and after Gen Z
they had really different childhoods and
they're not as prepared for conflict and
college we'll get into that later but
you put all these things together you
get kids who are much more anxious and
fragile much more depressed coming onto
campus at a time a much gray
political activism and now these grievin
studies ideas about America's a matrix
of oppression and look at the world in
terms of good versus evil it's more
appealing to them and it's that minority
of students they're the ones who are
initiating a lot of the movements it's
such a strange time to be on the outside
and watch this because a person like
myself is always counted on
intellectuals and professors and people
like yourself to sort of make sense of
things and to reinforce the idea that
freedom of speech and freedom to
knowledge and one of the things that's
most disturbing when you see in schools
is people that are even marginally
right-leaning or centrist being called
Nazis and being silenced and they're
pulling fire alarms when they're
speaking even people like christina hoff
sommers who's a feminist gets shouted
down and people yelling at her in car in
are fascism it's just very strange it's
very strange to watch from the outside
and it's also very strange to not see
any pushback by the professors so
sitting here and seeing this happen and
thinking with these poor kids they're
they're gonna have to go into the
workplace they're gonna have to right
now they're in this very insulated
environment they're gonna escape that
environment when they graduate and then
they're either gonna push this ideology
into the workforce which you do see now
that's it especially telling the lab
that yeah that's right no that's right I
know it's strange to look at it from the
outside and believe me it's stranger
from the inside hmm
but one thing I can say that it might be
helpful here is that from the outside
what you see is the news reports and the
news reports are going to be very
selective and so especially what happens
is because you know universities that
have always leaned left and so the right
leaning media have always been
suspicious so the right leaning media
has huge coverage of every little thing
and sometimes it's it's exaggerated
sometimes it's misinterpreted but the
most time there was something there
left-leaning media tends to ignore it
and so I go around the country and you
know people on the right expect that oh
my god it's chaos and mob violence on
campus which isn't true that's an
exaggeration and the left is like
problem what problem there's nothing
changing mmm and so I think the key
thing
keep in mind here is that there's about
4,500 institutions of higher education
in this country most of them are not
selective schools they'll take anyone
who comes and in those schools not much
is happening but if you go to the elite
liberal arts colleges in the North East
and the West Coast then usually
something is happening and so that
heterodox Academy it's a group that I
co-founded of professors that are
pushing back it's bipartisan we have as
many people on the room the left is on
the right we created a map of where all
the shout downs have taken place and
they're all right in the Northeast or
along the Pacific coast like from you
know evergreen you know down to you know
Berkeley and all that and then a couple
in Chicago so from in most of the
country this stuff is not happening most
schools the culture hasn't really
changed much but at the top schools in
general it has so that's one thing to
just keep in mind there is a moral panic
on the right about this which doesn't
mean that there's not something real
there really is a huge problem but it's
not as pervasive as is sometimes made
out to be
so is it akin to looking at violence in
the news media
like you when you read about violence in
terms of robberies and murders in
general you're not going to encounter
much in your life the world is a large
place yeah but we concentrate on these
really bad moments yeah it's a little
bit like that except that you know one
of the reasons that we took child we
took free play away from kids is that we
were afraid that they'd be abducted and
that almost no that was so rare and but
we got a lot of coverage of that in the
80s and 90s and we changed our behavior
because of that and that was a gross
overreaction the situation on campus is
is not like that is it's your odds of
being nailed are much higher than that
and so you know I hear every day or at
least every week I get an email from a
professor who says you know I I used a
metaphor in class and somebody reported
me and like you know you know and so it
once this happens to you you you pull
back you change your teaching style what
we're seeing on campus is a spectacular
collapse of trust between students and
professors and when we don't trust each
other
we can't we can't do our job we can't we
can't risk provoking being provocative
raising light
is raising uncomfortable ideas we have
to play it safe and then everybody
suffers is social media partially to
blame because it's huge
yeah social means a huge part of this
problem so in a couple ways so one is
the generational thing that we have kids
born after 1995 got this in middle
school it had a variety of effects on
them so kids coming in are more
conversant with call out culture and
that's a big part of this the other
thing though is that we used to have
what you would call a reasonable person
standard so you know so you know for
professor what's one oh so a professor
just wrote to me recently he said he you
know he got frustrated while trying to
explain something he said shoot me now
and a student was offended by this
because are you making fun of people
committing suicide and okay you know I
had she come to him and said you know
professor I know you didn't mean
anything but that was kind of
insensitive okay that would have been
great like that's the way to handle it
but for this generation raised with
callout culture and social media you
almost never hear of a student coming to
someone else in private because you
don't get credit for that yeah so you
only get credible home out publicly and
so that's why we're all walking on
eggshells because most of our students
are great most of them are fine but if I
have a class of 300 students a lecture
class I know that some of them subscribe
to this new call out culture safety is
immorality and so if I say one thing
it's not a reasonable person standard
it's a most sensitive person standard I
have to teach to the most sensitive
person in the class it's also that
person has the opportunity to score
right they have exactly throw up that
virtue flag like I've got one on the
board here look what I did I nailed the
professor on saying shoot me now and now
I'm a hero and I was made this a safer
space for everybody else that's right
and so and so that's really what is
messing us up at so many levels of
society and the fact that a lot of these
problems the the difficulties of
democracy the rise of authoritarian
populism there are a lot of weird trends
that are happening in multiple countries
and I think it's the rise of devices and
social media is the main way we can
explain why it's so similar across
countries do you think that this is
is this some sort of a trend that will
eventually correct itself when these
kids get out into the real world and
then go through a whole generation of
that and then people realize the error
of their ways and the disastrous results
of having these unprepared or
emotionally unprepared kids no I'm not
really confident that it will not
correct itself I think that once we
understand it I think there are ayat II
things we can do to change it but I
think here's the way to understand and
why it's not gonna change itself so so
I'm a I'm a social psychologist is my
main my main area but I love all of the
social sciences I love thinking about
complex systems and systems composed of
people are really different from systems
composed of stars or neutrons or
anything else and so if you have a
complex system composed of people these
people are primarily working to increase
their prestige so I mean once we have
our needs for you know food and things
like that are set
we're always interacting in ways to make
ourselves look good and to protect
ourselves from being nailed you know or
accused of something so we're always
doing reputation management now think
about in any group what gives you
prestige and so if you look in a group
of teenagers you might have a group in
which it's athletics and so if that's
how you get prestige then all the kids
are going to be working out and training
and practicing and that doesn't hurt
anybody that doesn't impose an external
cost on anyone else but you can have
some really sick prestige economies and
so there's a there's an ethnography
about a an indigenous population in the
Philippines by Shelley rosaldo is the
anthropologist I think it's called
knowledge and passion about the Elan
good which is a name for a tribe in the
Philippines and in this tribe it's a
headhunting tribe they find people and
cut off their heads not just for fun for
prestige so in a lot of societies you
have a lot of male initiation boys have
to do something to become a man and if
the thing you have to do to become a man
is you have to cut off someone's head
okay so that imposes rather a heavy cost
on outsiders all right so this is a Sikh
culture this is not one where we can say
oh well that's just the way they do
things
okay this has to stop and ideally they
would cut off a stranger's head like
they'd find someone for another tribe or
someone you know from you know
government agency that just cut off his
head
but if necessary fight or if there's
somebody within their larger community
that can also get you points so this is
a really sick culture now head now call
out culture is not quite that bad but
it's the same logic okay so if you have
a group of teenagers or college students
who are all struggling for prestige as
we all are and if you get a subculture
in which the way you get prestige is by
calling someone out showing that their
racist sexist homophobic transphobic
Islamophobic whatever it is if you can
catch them you get the points what
you're doing here is you're imposing
external cost on others and that's what
makes you so insufferable because you
are playing your game but I'm paying the
cost of your game and so that I think
it's hard people aren't going to break
out of that themselves but once we
understand what's happening I think in a
sense we can all come together and call
out call out culture and say stop stop
imposing these costs on us how but how
are we gonna reach those kids if
professors are so terrified to speak out
and to cause controversy in class and no
one wants to criticize them because if
you do you risk your job you risk them
organizing against you and how does this
shift so that so I'm hopeful that we can
shift it because most people hate it
so even the people who do it recognize
that they're always on eggshells they
can be next there's the tendency of
people in this culture to you know as we
say they eat their own they eventually
turn on each other and the mental health
costs of it I mean there are a number of
essays that have been written by people
who sort of left that and it sounds
miserable to be inside it you're always
you know you there's no humor there's no
fun it's always you know hyper serious
angry and so so I think that I think if
we can if we can raise kids or encourage
them to see the games that social media
makes them do and give them a vocabulary
I don't know we should come up with some
catchy terms for it but give them a
vocabulary so that they can they cannot
like
oh you're you know you're a calling
outer I don't that's monkey we can help
them label this behavior mess it market
exactly that's yeah there's patterns
that you see in people that from a
distance like if I look at it when I
look at them objectively there's like
these these patterns I go oh that's one
of those magog eyes he's one of those
you know he's got an American flag with
an eagle in his avatar on Twitter and if
you go through his page it's all like
talking great about POTUS and
criticizing anyone who talks about about
trumpets it's strange it's like these
patterns of behavior these predetermines
Hatter's like there are stereotypes not
just stereotypes like they've fallen
into a well-oiled slick groove that's
very easy to predict if you are one of
those people it's it's super easy to
predict that you're going to be pro
Second Amendment it's super easy to
predict that you're probably gonna be
skeptical about climate change there's
all these different things that go along
with these patterns of behavior and you
see them on the right you see them on
the left and it's it's weird to watch
it's weird to watch on the outside it's
like well this is such a an easy pattern
to slip into yeah well that's right
so there's data from the Pew survey as
they've been measuring attitudes of
Americans since the 80s or 90s but
they've been publishing this series on
polarization in which they show that in
the 90s if you knew somebody's attitude
on say gun control that would only
predict their attitude on abortion a
certain percent and a lot of people on
the left let's say would hold six of the
ten leftist attitudes and same on the
right but gradually by the time you get
to around twenty ten it's like if you
know one attitude you know them all and
that's important just because if you
turn up the volume so we evolved to do
us versus them and the more we see you
know if it's us America versus them
communist Russia or Nazi Germany well
then you know then we all come together
and that's great for social cohesion and
Trust but as that fades away and as
us-versus-them became increasingly left
versus right and as we lost the liberal
Republicans and the conservative
Democrats those used to exist until the
80s or 90s
as we lost them once it becomes us
versus them as left versus right now if
you only hold your team's position on
six out of ten items you're a traitor
and so you better get with the program
and so the pressures for conformity the
pressures to agree with your team on
everything have been steadily rising and
that means there's no nuance and we
can't do higher education without nuance
we can't do college without free
thinking and the ability to say well you
know what we'd a second maybe they do
have a point on this on this thing and
that's one of the reasons why it looks
so weird from the outside and why it's
getting so unpleasant from the inside
when you're teaching classes and a
subject comes up that may be
controversial do you do you have like
this overwhelming feeling that you're
treading on dangerous ground yes yeah so
I second one-on-one at the University of
Virginia and I would do all I would take
them into you know sex differences the
origin of sex sexual orientation I would
even do race differences and you know
because there was a reasonable person
standard and I trusted my students and
they trusted me and we had a great time
and we covered a lot a lot of stuff but
now and then I moved to New York
University in 2011 when my last but
previus book the righteous mind came out
and it's not it's not about UVA versus
NYU is just about the changing time now
as I said I have to teach to the most
sensitive students so I teach a course
on business ethics on professional
responsibilities and we have a section
on on discrimination and employment law
it's important to cover we have to cover
it you know MBA students have to know
where the lines are what the law is and
yeah I'm kind of scared when I teach
that because you know I'd like to get
into all sorts of things I'd like to get
into well you know what - numerical
disparities mean if there's a gender
difference in you know in the percentage
of tech but not in the percentage of non
tech employees in Silicon Valley what
does that mean I would like to talk
about that but if a single student
thinks that I am denying the existence
of sexism they could be offended by that
and in every bathroom at NYU there's a
sign telling
how to report me anonymously and they
put these up in 2016 in response to
student requests and that means that all
professors are on notice that they can
be reported and honestly at any moment
by children well these are well I'm not
gonna call them children I mean my
students are MBA students but but the
undergrads here 17 17 to 21 year olds
for the undergrads yes that's right
barely not children anymore that's right
and there's an incentive to this this
what we're talking about before those
Misenum attention they get prestige they
get value from it and this that this
culture encourages these things that's
right and this is a terrible lesson to
teach them so you know the subtitle of
our book it's called the coddling the
American mind how good intentions and
bad ideas are setting up a generation
for failure and so these microaggression
reporting system that's basically what
it is a microaggression reporting system
it has a good intention behind it
there are cases of professors who make
ethnic jokes okay they should stop doing
that I mean maybe that was okay 30 years
ago you know there are there there are
legitimate complaints and faculty do
there should be some accountability some
responsibility so there's a good
intention behind it but it's usually
based on no empirical evidence and
because it's based on pressure applied
to a bureaucracy not by a committee
thinking hmm how can we improve the
climate for everyone no no it's like we
make these demands and we demand 10
things in the administration says okay
we'll give you five of them there's not
thought put into what would happen if we
give the students an East German style
anonymous reporting system and so
everybody's on notice that they can be
report at any point what might happen to
the social dynamics like nobody thought
that through mmm
so the net the net effect again is the
spectacular collapse of trust on campus
to be in the middle of that it's gotta
be so bizarre having taught for so many
years before that and to watch almost
like this virus overtake the
institutions that's what it felt like
and that's why so you know Greg lukianov
came to me in 2014 so Greg I'll just uh
briefly tell this story of the book Greg
is the president of the foundation for
individual rights in education
he fired and they defend free speech
rates on campus and they were always
pushing back against administrators who
would say oh you know we need a free
speech zone and they're always afraid of
liability and so but suddenly in 2014
Gregg starts seeing students pushing
back on speech rights saying we want you
know ban that speaker you know we need a
you know a safe space if a debate is
going to be held new stuff weird stuff
and Greg who is prone to depression
he had a suicidal depression in 2007
he's hospitalized when he gets out of
the hospital he learns CBT cognitive
behavioral therapy and in that you learn
these like 15 or so cognitive
distortions like catastrophizing over
generalizing black and white thinking so
Greg learns to not do those himself and
then he goes back to work at fire and
then in 2014 he sees students saying oh
if you know if Christina Hoff Sommers
comes to campus you know people will die
or they'll be you know people will be
harmed injured and so there's this this
new way of thinking and Greg thinks wow
how are students learning to do this
like are we teaching them on campus to
think in these distorted ways and if we
are isn't that going to make them
depressed so Greg comes to talk to me in
May of 2014 to tell me this idea and I
think it's really brilliant I think it's
a great idea because I'd begun to see
this you know the safe spaces that
microaggressions the trigger warning
requests so we we wrote up our RSA
submitted to the Atlantic it came out in
August of 2015 and it was like we've
just seen the first outbreaks of a virus
and then in the fall of 2015 it's it
becomes an epidemic and so many of your
listeners will have heard of or seeing
the videos of what happened to Yale in
in November 2015 when Erica Christakis
wrote an email saying that wait a second
Yale is telling you how to do your
Halloween costumes maybe we should think
this through ourselves maybe you're old
enough to make your own decisions some
students get very upset they protest
they bring demands to the president
they're screaming at her husband so it
was then when that protest was
successful
when the president of Yale basically
said you know we're wrong you're right
we validate your narrative we'll give
you as much as we can of your demands
when when that happened then the protest
went national and so throughout 2016 you
have you have groups of students making
these demands demanding microaggression
reporting systems so that's when NYU put
in its systems its microaggression
reporting systems so that Yale event
wasn't just an isolated incident it
really was the spark I think so yeah
yeah so there's all these trip threads
coming together didn't come out of
nowhere all these things are happening
it's almost like the you know the whole
the whole room is like almost at
combustion temperature and then Yale was
the spark that sent to national what's
crazy about Yale is anybody that's
objective that's watching from the
outside is like these students are out
of control they're screaming at this
professor like this is supposed to be a
safe place and you know you fucked this
up and they're they're being incredibly
hostile and aggressive towards him and
surrounding him and when when you watch
that from the outside you think well
obviously they've got to punish these
students I mean they did the opposite
yeah that's right a chance that's well
it doesn't make sense from the outside
but again you have to look at different
games being played so so I went to Yale
I graduated from there in 1985 I loved
it I was in Davenport colleges one of
the 12 residential colleges and there
were a lot of intellectual events that
would happen in the colleges like the
master of the college or the Dean of the
college would bring in all kinds of
people to speak so they were
intellectual spaces as well as sort of
home-like or not exactly home-like like
transitional places where they were
there were places that you lived so the
Yale that I knew was a place that taught
me to think in lots of different ways
and it just was constantly blowing my
mind like when I took my first economics
course it was like wow here's a new pair
of spectacles that I can put on and
suddenly I see all these you know prices
and supply and like I never I never
learned to think that way where I
learned about Freud in psychology or
sociology so a good education is one
that lets you look at our complicated
world through multiple perspectives and
that makes you smart that's what a
liberal arts education should do
but what I see increasingly happening
especially at elite schools is the
dominance of a single story and that
single story is life is a battle between
good people and evil people or rather
good groups and evil groups and it's a
zero-sum game and so if the bad groups
have more it's because they took it from
the good groups and so the point of
everything is to fight the bad groups
bring them down create equality and this
is a terrible way to think in a free
society I mean that might have worked
you know in biblical days when you got
the Moabites killing the Jebusites or
whatever but you know we we live in an
era in which we've discovered that that
the pie can be grown a million fold and
so to teach students to see society as a
zero-sum competition between groups is
primitive and destructive now in your
book you you actually identify the
moment where these micro aggressions
sort of made their appearance and they
were initially a racist thing so yeah so
the idea of a micro aggression it goes
back to I forget the Scots and
african-american sociologists in the 70s
first coined the term but it really
becomes popular in a 2007 article by
Derald wing sue at Teachers College and
so he talks about this concept of
microaggressions and there are two
things that are good about the concert
that are useful and so one is as racism
as explicit racism has clearly gone down
by any measure explicit racism is
plummeted in American across the West
but you know there could still be subtle
or veiled a racist claim so perfect
legitimate how do you define the
difference between explicit racism
well explicit racism is you know calling
someone a racial slur I hate you because
X and they are identified because of
they've been reported as crimes or well
I would just say that if you're a member
of a culture you can tell when someone
is saying something to insult to put
down her to express hostility right and
that's something that judgment we can
make right and as that's become socially
unacceptable in most circles
so explicit racism is way way down right
but how I'm sorry but the my only
question is how are they measuring is
that well how do you measure
microaggression well how do you measure
even explicit racism yeah oh you say
it's down certainly attitude measures so
there are so surveys done in private how
would you feel if if a black family
moved in next door if a Filipino family
moved now so how would you feel if your
child married you know a Jew a Muslim
hmm so explicit surveys show it
certainly I mean if when you do surveys
of people's experience right people of
race of every race when they report how
often this happens to me every year the
numbers are actually fairly low so there
are ways of measuring experiences of
racism right um how accurate these cause
like first of all I used to have a joke
about this but the idea is that the
problem surveys is your only getting
information people from people so stupid
they take surveys who's taking surveys
so some surveys are subject to that but
you know in general if you if you
approach a question from multiple
perspectives and say in one condition
you pay them for an accurate answer or
not when one condition they're anonymous
or they're not so you can get a sense of
how much the answer moves around
depending on external conditions and so
anyway the point I just want to make is
that the acceptability of using the
n-word or other things you know if a
bunch of white people are talking the
acceptability using the n-word I think
has gone way down in general would you
agree with that yes yes and tremendously
I mean III agree with the the sentiment
and I agree with the the trend that
there is absolutely a trend away from
racism but I was just curious says how
they measured it yeah I'm not an expert
in that area so I'm assuming it's survey
is an analysis of discourse it's
ultimately for everyone's sake I mean
even for the sake of the people that are
in embroiled in all this controversy and
chaos it would be fantastic across the
board if there was no more sexism there
was no more racism there was no more any
of these things yeah me it would be
wonderful
then we could just start treating pew
Mons as just human
like this is just who you are you're
just a person no one cares that would be
what a wonderful world we would live in
if this was no longer an issue at all
beautifully put how does that get how
does that ever get through so we were
getting there okay that's what the
twenty no I mean that's what the
twentieth century was about so you and I
are shaped by Unruh how old you are I'm
okay I'm 55 we were shaped by the late
20th century and the late 20th century
was a time in America in which you know
earlier on there was all kinds of
prejudice I mean when I was so when I
was born just right before you were born
it was legal to say you can't eat here
because you're black and so you know
that change in 1964-65 but it used to be
that we had legal differentiations by
race and then those were knocked down
but we still had social and it used to
be that if you were gay there was
something humiliating it had to be
hidden and you you know I mean so if you
look at where we were in 1960 or 63 when
I was born and then you look at where we
got by 2000 I mean the progress is
fantastic on every front so that's all I
mean when I say we were moving in that
direction and to your point about you
know wouldn't be great if there was none
of this we just treated people like
people okay yeah that was the 20th
century idea is let's let's get past
these tribal identifications and what is
so alarming to me now is that on campus
it began on campus but it's spreading
elsewhere there and against not
everywhere on campus it's mostly in the
grievant Studies departments um they're
teaching students the opposite they're
teaching students don't treat everyone
like a person people are their
identities and you can tell somebody
identities by looking at people and so
you know if they're good or bad this I
think is the opposite of progress well
it's it's also the differences between
us are really fascinating the difference
is between men and women I think are
some of the more interesting
explanations for human behavior and not
meaning that people must be defined by
their gender but defined by their sex
and but it is interesting when you look
at these gigantic groups like why
certain people tend to gravitate towards
certain
patience or certain types of behavior or
certain hobbies it is really fascinating
yeah that's right and if we were playing
the truth-seeking game if all we cared
about is trying to understand things we
would do the research and we'd figure
out what do people like you know and do
left-handers versus right-handers have
different preferences probably not as
far as I know do boys and girls have
different preferences yeah they're
really big do men and women have
different do they enjoy different things
yeah so we could take that we could say
our goal is to create a free society
this is this is what the word liberal
traditionally meant a society which
people are free to construct a life that
they want to live yeah and so if you're
born one race or another that should not
in any way be a limitation and in the
20th century we made a lot of progress
towards that ideal same thing but you
keep saying we did meaning that you
you're implying that it ended at the
progress hit a wall um yeah I shouldn't
imply that because overall I think the
trends are unstoppable
right so I don't want to say that things
are reverse yeah I agree but you feel
like there's a slowdown or not which
yeah I think that so so in chapter 3 of
the coddling Greg and I look at identity
politics and one thing we really try to
do is there's all these loaded terms and
you know see if somebody says social
justice warrior okay you know a lot
about them if they said that like
they're gonna come at it and say oh
those sjw's and and we don't do any of
that we we say there are people on
campus who are very focused on identity
issues and on injustice is based on
identity and that's great and there's a
lot to be concerned about and their
right to do that now how do they do it
and there's two different ways you can
either do what we call common enemy
identity politics which is where you say
life is a battle between good groups and
evil groups let's divide people by you
know by race so it's basically this you
know straight versus everyone else men
versus all the other genders and white
versus everybody else and so you look at
you know the straight white men they're
the problem all the other groups must
unite to fight the straight white man so
that's that one of the core ideas of
intersectionality and so what we say in
the book is that leads to eternal
conflict much better is to is an
identity politics based on common human
so we don't say oh you know to help with
identity politics we say you have to
have identity politics until you have
perfect justice and equality you have to
have a way for groups to organize to
push back on things to demand just
that's fine but if you do it by first
emphasizing common humanity that's what
Martin Luther King did that's what Pauli
Murray did that's what Nelson Mandela
did this
so this wonderful woman Paula Murray she
was like the gay black possibly trans
civil rights leader in beginning the 40s
she says when my you know when my
opponents draw a small circle to exclude
me I shall draw a larger circle to
include them I shall shout for the
rights of all mankind and this is again
when Martin Luther King did he's
relentlessly appealing to our white
brothers and sisters he's using the
language of America of Christianity
start by saying what we have in common
and then people's hearts are open we're
within a community now we can talk about
our difficulties so it's the rise of
common enemy identity politics on campus
in the grievant Studies departments
especially that I think is an alarming
trend another thing that's alarming to
me is the redefining of terms like
sexism and racism or sexism against men
is impossible racism against white
people is impossible there's redefining
as these prejudices only exist if you're
coming from a position of power that's
really weird and it also it opens up the
door to treating people as an other
literally the people that are the
victims of racism are now using racism
against other people and feeling
justified because of it and in having a
bunch of people that will agree with
them that this is in fact not racism and
this is pushing back on white privilege
and saying all these different weird
things that you know and they feel
really comfortable in saying these open
racist generalizing things about white
people or about white men or about you
know fill in the blank but whatever
group that you're you're attacking and
it's it's really strange it's really
strange to see but again it makes sense
if you look at the different games yeah
so if you're on a university and you
think you're playing the truth game
and philosophers are great at this
they're always unpacking terms and so
you might try to define racism or any
sort of ism and you a common-sense view
would be an expression of hostility or
resentment or limitation on a group
based on their identity but that's if
you're playing the truth-seeking game if
you're playing the the politics game or
the warfare game you want to define the
terms to give your side maximum
advantage so there's a wonderful social
psychologist named Phil tetlock at Penn
at Wharton and and he talks about these
different mindsets we get into and one
of them he calls the intuitive
prosecutor so if if I'm if my goal as a
scholar is to prosecute my enemies and
maximally convict them and I am always
trying to defend you know seven
different identity groups against the
straight white men they're the the
they're the accused I want to define my
terms to make it maximally easy to
convict and so I'm going to say racism
and microaggressions it doesn't matter
what the intent was all that matters is
the impact all that matters of what the
person felt that way as long as
someone's offended I get to charge you
with a crime mmm
so and also on racism you can say as you
know a lot of kids are learning in high
school that these days racism is
prejudice plus power so by definition a
black person or a gay person or whatever
any you know cannot be racist or
whatever other term because they don't
have power regardless of their social
class it's actually being taught yeah
yes so the professors are this is kind
of their mouth well just saying so this
is taught in a number of high schools my
nephews went to Andover there's an
offensive thing yes it would be teaching
children it's not just that it's
offensive and obviously hypocritical
it's that it's crippling yes I mean can
you imagine can you sew it look you've
got you've got kids but you have two
daughters and three okay see have three
daughters can you imagine giving your
daughters a cloak of invulnerability
yeah where you say you put this on now
you get to attack others but no one can
touch you right like this is gonna warp
their development power corrupts and
even moral a rhetorical power
it's as well how is this being taught
though I mean houses because about
houses except as a part of a curriculum
so because the goal is not truth the
goal is victory over racism let's say
and so if that's the case you're gonna
focus on educating kids about their
white privilege and making and so that's
what a lot of these privilege exercises
are you know you line kids up by their
privilege and you and your goal is to
make the straight white boys feel bad
about their privilege and therefore talk
less take up less space their privilege
this is what we're talking about earlier
about the goal is no racism the
privilege only exists if there's racism
like instead of concentrating on the
privilege it only exists if people do
preferentially treat certain with the
preferential treatment towards certain
races if that doesn't exist at all then
white privilege doesn't exist why I'm
not sure I'm not sure I'd agree view on
that so we also well so we had a funny
episode last night and so my wife and I
were out in LA we were invited to the
Golden Globes by by a friend and so
we're here in LA so we we go to bed in
the hotel room and at 2:00 in the
morning the guys pounding on the door
saying come on let me in it's me it's me
and I wake up and I go to the door and I
and I say wrong room and he can't hear
me so I opened the door a crack and to
show him you know like look I don't know
I don't know who you are right and you
know some drunk some drunk guy and I
said you know you've got the wrong room
and I went back to bed and then it
breakfast this morning my wife says why
did you open the door like how could you
have done that I said you know we're in
a nice hotel I mean what's you know
what's gonna happen and she made it
clear like a woman would never have done
that
like she said you as a man you have the
ability to go out in the world and
engage with in a certain way that I
don't have is well yes and that's a
great example so there is a male
privilege sure exists even if there's no
sexism yeah that's an interesting that's
an interesting example that's a that's a
sexism one but that's also a physical
danger one yeah that's there's a there
is a difference between just the way
women have to go out into the world
being vulnerable and also being the
target of
just a male sexual attention it's a very
different thing it's an aggressive
person dangerous thing yeah but I think
you could say the same thing about race
in this way so because there's racism
though well okay okay you're right if if
there was absolute zero racism right
anywhere but we're never gonna get to
that but but the thing that we're
worried about is the racism so like if
you worried about us if someone's if you
say you have white privilege well that
only exists if you're being dealt with
in a racist manner so if you're a black
person and there is racism that's being
directed towards you and it's not being
directed towards me then you can say
well I have white privilege but if
there's no racism directed towards
anybody that doesn't exist anymore
relation is racism yes right okay but so
look I think it's it's helpful to always
try to look at it from the other
person's point of view sure to listen to
their arguments and so for example when
you and I go into any social encounter
it never occurs to me that something you
know something's gonna come up and
someone's gonna call me a kike let's say
right yeah because I'm Jewish
and it's just it just it never crosses
my mind that someone's gonna humiliate
me because I'm Jewish but if you're
black even if you're in a very tolerant
society at some point someone is going
to make an assumption it might happen it
might be so all I'm saying is you and I
don't there are certain things we don't
have to think about and that at whereas
if we were black or other identities or
visibly gay or you know there would be
the risk of spoiling of a social
interaction so I'm totally comfortable
saying we should be telling our kids
about this but what follows from it what
follows from it should we therefore be
telling kids okay so you know you know
it judge people based on their
appearance be suspicious of people based
on their race and gender that's where
that's where I get off the but the bus
that's where I say now we're really
hurting kids we should be turning down
the moralism and we're turning it up
right but what I'm getting at is
pointing at someone and saying you have
white privilege if they are not racist
you're you're you're you're giving this
person you're putting these this person
in a category that really only exists in
the face of racism
or the real problem is racism yes with
the male/female thing is a very
different male priviledge I think is way
more slippery and wait because it's
biologically based there's a creepiness
to men and there is and as much as a
nice guy as I'm sure you are and I try
very hard to be a nice guy but every
woman's encounter creaks yes it's it's
inevitable because it's there's a game
being played this pursuing of sexual
pleasure
or of sexual encounters this doesn't
exist or shouldn't exist with races yeah
the just the real problem in my eyes is
racism and if we could figure out a way
to just complete obviously it's not
gonna look people are flawed they're
they're going to be until there's some
sort of new way that we interface with
each other that eliminates lies and
deception and allows each other to
completely understand each other's
feelings and appreciate them which may
happen someday probably
technologically-driven
until that happens there's going to be a
certain amount of it but the real enemy
is racism it's not white people just
getting lucky yeah okay but I would say
not that we shouldn't acknowledge yeah
yeah so you said earlier about how
definitions change so we are evolving as
a society we're getting less sexist and
racist and so our threshold for what
counts as sexist noises going down
that's a good thing that should happen
right but I think what we need to call
attention to is that when you if you
lower the threshold faster than the
reality changes then you make progress
but yet people feel worse and worse and
so and so I think that's part of what's
happening on campus that makes sounds
the the the progress so the the loudest
protest tend to happen at the most
progressive schools it's places like
Middlebury and Yale and Berkeley and you
know so I think that we are we are if
you bring in a diverse student body and
we're all trying to diversify we're all
in every school I know of is trying very
hard to create a very diverse student
body so if we do that and we bring
people in and we give them a common
humanity approach it's going to work
great diversity if you handle it well
you it can confirm many benefits but if
you handle it wrong if you try to make
people see race and other groups more
and you attach moral valence as to it
and you give them a lot of the stuff
that they get in the grievance studies
of course they're gonna be angry and of
course they're gonna feel that people
hate them it's a terrible thing to bring
people into a university and to teach
them you know what this institution is
white supremacist people have implicit
bias against you wherever you go people
are gonna hate you like no this is a
really bad thing to do to create an open
trusting inclusive diverse environment
right the right thing to do would be to
emphasize how foolish racism really is
and about how damaging it is not just to
our culture but to you as an individual
to look at people in that way and not
open your heart in your mind to all
these different races and I think one of
the worst examples of modern racism
that's gone unchecked is what's going on
at Harvard with Asian students where
Asian students are instead of instead of
being completely neutral in terms of how
they approach all these races Asian
students actually have to try harder to
get into Harvard and there because
there's so many of them and they're
doing so well yeah they're being
punished for excelling which is really
racist I mean you're it's it's racist
against the people that are doing the
best which is really crazy and they're a
minority which is even more crazy and
because of their culture because they're
so hardworking and they're not in
general then the not the type to be
really loud and protest these things
right it's gone on z target well it to
the point where now they've had to have
a class-action lawsuit that's right
that's right so you know my hope again
I'm a 20th century person my hope is
that as time goes on we'll get past all
this you have to be a 21st century
version no no I think that you have to
well okay but you know what the there
are okay wait
moral cultures evolved and they don't
always evolve in a positive way right
and so I think the evolution late 20th
century was incredibly positive and I
think we are I think young people are
losing touch with some of the hard-won
lessons of the past so I'm not gonna say
oh we have to just accept whatever
morality is here I still am ultimately
liberal in the sense that what I dream
of is a society in which people are free
to create lives that they want to live
and they're not forced to do things
they're not change there's a minimum of
conflict and we make room
for each other if we're gonna have a
diverse society we've really got to be
tolerant and make room for each other
that's my dream and I think in the last
five or ten years we've gotten really
far from that I mean the you know my
first book the happiness hypothesis was
about ten ancient ideas and you know one
is that we're too judgmental you know
judge not lest ye be judged but I think
the new version of that if there was a
21st century Jesus he'd say judge a lot
more judge all the time judge harshly
don't give anyone with the benefit the
doubt and don't let anyone judge you
like that is not gonna be a recipe for a
functioning society so no I do not
accept this aspect of 21st century
morality well you're you're obviously
much more entrenched in it than I am
my hope and this might be naive is that
what these far left and far like that
the really extreme what it represents is
the the the extreme poles of this
shifting thing so that the whole thing
is going to move closer to a better
place and you're always going to have
really extreme but your was gonna have
white supremacy and you always gonna
have extreme social justice people
you're suggesting it's a pendulum yes
some things are pendulums some are not
yeah okay so there are problems of
progress there are some things that are
kind of one way so you know so I'm often
pessimistic about certain social trends
but I'm very influenced by Steve Pinker
who I know you had on the show and Matt
Ridley and others who say look the arc
of progress is amazingly ravenous all
good and you know Nick Kristof just had
a column that last year was the best
year in human history if you look at
overall human welfare so that's all true
but there are certain things that happen
with progress that lead to certain
countervailing trends that are not like
pendulum and so for example okay here's
one kids it's it seems pretty clear that
that human beings need a certain amount
of hardship stress and challenge in
order to develop basic human abilities
kids who are neglected and abused are
are damaged I mean if it goes beyond
certain limits you you have chronic
stress you can have brain damage so we
as
as we've gotten rid of a lot of the
worst things that's great but as we're
making life better and better and easier
and easier for kids as we're protecting
them from more and more we're we're
preventing them from basically expanding
their abilities and so it's possible
that as we as we get wealthier and safer
and more humane and more caring and as
we have smaller and smaller families as
we get richer all over the world so that
you have two parents spending all this
time with one kid it's possible that we
are interfering with kids development to
the point where we might have an
epidemic of anxiety and depression that
could happen oh wait a second it has so
you know I think that there are certain
problems of progress that are not
pendulum they change things and those
changes have some negative repercussions
that we're gonna have to actively fix
it's not gonna swing back by itself what
concerns me when you're talking about
all these ideas is that there's a
restriction on how you are able to
communicate to children or to students I
should say to young people how their
minds work and how they're there how
these patterns can form and how you know
this this pattern can be ultimately
damaging to them but yet it feels
rewarding in the act of doing it and
that their own patterns that they're
involved in right now might be
incredibly problematic for them in the
future but if you bring it up you're
criticizing who they ant
of who they are as a human you're
disregarding your white privilege you're
doing all these different things you
can't really do you you're doing all
these things that could run into these
problems with this sort of new paradigm
and what what how do you how do you
mitigate that when you're teaching kids
like how do you how do you talk to them
about the way the mind works when it's
involving these critical things that are
like incredibly sensitive to discuss
today mm-hmm okay so let's you might be
talking about like issues like race and
sex yeah raised in size okay but okay
let's go back to the beginning let's
start with child development okay let's
let's let's start with what should we be
doing with kids to make them tougher so
that
you know as they live in the world is
safer and safer cars are safer the death
rate for kids has been plummeting for
all all causes other than suicide which
is going up so as kids live in a safer
and safer world they also have the
Internet which is going to expose them
to virtual insults forever and ever so
how we're gonna raise kids to be
maximally effective in this new 21st
century world which it's physically very
safe but virtually unsafe ok how are we
gonna do that
and I think the key idea that we need to
put on the table here that I think
everybody who works with kids needs to
keep in mind every day is antifragility
I know you've talked about that on the
show before yeah but I'll just I should
I can just give a very brief you know
explanation of because it's such an
important concept so antifragility a lot
of listeners when there was a word
coined by Nassim Taleb the guy who wrote
the Black Swan because there are certain
systems and he was I think he was
motivated by the collapse of the banking
system so he had predicted the collapse
because he said the banking system is
really convoluted and it's never been
tested a system needs to be tested
challenged shocked in order to then
develop defenses against it and our
system has not been tested so if
anything goes wrong it's all going down
all right you reference him quite a few
times yes that's right really concept
events are fragile
that's right it's a key idea in our book
and it I find as I talk about this
around the country once you explain this
to people who work with kids like
everybody gets it right away all right
so so tell em says there's no word for
this property he says we know that some
things are fragile and so if you have a
glass you have a wine glass on the table
you knock it over
it breaks okay it doesn't get better in
any way and so you know you don't give
kids a wine glass you give them a
plastic sippy cup because plastic is
resilient but if a kid knocks over a
sippy cup it doesn't get better in any
way until that wanted to know what's the
word for things that do get better when
you knock them over and the classic
example is the immune system so the
immune system is an incomplete system
it's a miracle of evolution that we have
this system for making you know handy
bodies but it doesn't know exactly what
to be reactive to that has to be set by
childhood experience and so if you keep
your kids in a bubble
and you use bacterial wipes and you
don't let them be exposed to bacteria
you're crippling the system the system
has to get knocked over it has to get
challenged threatened it has to have has
to learn how to it expand its abilities
and so so this is why peanut allergies
are going up yeah that was a really
shocking part of your book that's right
it's stunning how fast this happened
please explain that to people the whole
peanut allergy thing yeah so peanut
allergies used to be really rare and
most of us you know older folk we
brought peanut butter sandwiches to
school and when my son Max started
preschool in 2008 you know they went on
and on about no nuts nothing that
touched and not nothing that looks like
a nut nothing that has the word naughty
I mean it was crazy how defensive they
were about nuts and as we write in the
book I thought back on that and I said
wait a second like why you know we're
freaking out about nuts and the more we
freaked out about it
the higher the allergy rate goes and it
turns out there was a study done in
published in 2015 where the researchers
noticed that the allergy to nuts is only
going up in countries that tell pregnant
women to avoid nuts and they thought
well maybe that's why and so they did a
controlled experiment they got about 600
women who had given birth recently and
and whose kids were at higher risk of
analogy because they had eczema or some
other you know immune system sort of
issue so about 300 of them are told
standard advice your kids at risk the
peanut allergy so you should not eat
peanuts while you're lactating and keep
peanuts away from your kid and the other
half we're told here is an Israeli snack
food it's a puffed corn with a peanut
peanut powder dusting on the outside
give it to your kids starting at you
know three or four months whenever
they're ready to eat and so and they
monitor them they made sure that they
weren't you know failed reactions or
sewer or strong reactions and then at
the age of five they gave them all a
very thorough immunological tests and of
the ones who followed the standard
advice 17% had a peanut allergy they
would have to watch out for peanuts for
the rest of their lives that's such a
high number because these were because
these were it's we're already
predisposed yeah and but the half that
were predisposed but given peanut powder
three percent
just 3% had a peanut allergy at age 5 in
other words we could almost wipe out
peanut allergies by giving peanut powder
to kids and site it just a few months
ago at science the front page article
was on doing that and so again good
intentions and bad ideas we're trying to
protect our kids so Oh keep them away
from peanuts but that's exactly the
wrong advice because kids are anti
fragile and so we're doing the same
thing well sync them the real issue is
the people that have an actual severe
allergy that's your child yeah yes but
that's what this science article was
about was that exposure therapies are
being tested and they are the most
effective so even with people with yes
extremes just have to start slow so
you'd so give him a very very special
yeah because I was on a plane once and
they informed us that they didn't want
us to even eat peanuts on the plane
because there was someone on the plane
that was so allergic that if you eat
peanuts and you chew it and it's in the
air it could adversely affect that
person yeah and that could well be true
so I have no objection to that but the
reason we got to that point is because
we started banning peanuts long ago so
this is one of these well I'm not sure
if it's a problem of progress but as we
know it's not necessarily but but it's
an example of antifragility okay so now
let's bring this to the playground
alright so you know when you and I were
kids you know boys and girls have
different social interactions but boys
tease each other right and salt each
other you throw around insults right
yeah and that's part of developing to be
a boy now if it turns into bullying like
a bunch of kids or one you know after
one kid day after day okay that's
terrible we have to do something about
that
I'm not saying bullying is okay but as
we've cracked down on bullying and as
we've gotten more and more sensitive
about harm in general we're cracking
down on any kind of teasing cruelty
exclusion so my kids go to New York City
public schools which are generally
pretty good but on the playground you
know there's a monitor and the
playground monitor look you know if
there's conflict he comes and checks it
out if a kid is crying he checks it out
you know seems like a good thing to do
but it's like treating kids like they're
allergic to peanuts kids have to have
thousands and thousands of conflicts
they have to be exposed to insults an
exclusion and teasing and if you can
imagine if you could keep your daughter
in a protective
tank when nobody would tease her or
insult or hurt her feelings for 18 years
would you do it absolutely not you know
it's um it's it's important that they do
experience some assholes they just have
to know but you know on the flip side
there are certain people that are
damaged for the rest their life by
bullies and some like I have a friend
and his brother used to beat him up when
when they lived together and it still
fucks with him to this day and he's in
his 50s yeah like I think he has a
certain level of depression that's
directly correlated that's right yeah I
mean I can't say about your friend but
the research shows the research does
show that bullying can leave permanent
scars yeah so there are a couple things
we have to keep our eye on kids are anti
fragile yes but but two things one is
they need challenges that are graded to
their level of ability hmm so if they're
overwhelmed and if the suffering goes on
day after day so if kids are bade if
their brain is bathed in cortisol so
cortisol is a normal stress hormone you
have to experience stress you have to
have cortisol and then it drops goes up
and down up and down but kids who are
raised either you an environment they're
bullied or they're abused at home they
don't have a secure attachment
relationship then they get brain damage
then you you're hurting kids if it's
chronic so I am in no way saying
bullying is okay you got to keep that
you got to keep the line right but but
again you have to look at each
institution so each school is not
thinking hmm how can we carefully draw
the line between bullying and valuable
sorts of conflict no they're thinking if
we do this well we get sued right and if
we're not really careful at bullying
we're gonna get sued and so let's
overreact let's go this way
yeah that's unfortunate really but how
do you decide how much bullying is
accept like it's like venom like giving
them a little bit so they develop a
tolerance yeah but so there's um we said
we did some research on bullying we
didn't put it in the book because while
we suspect that anti-bullying policies
that that go too far and that band
conflict what we suspect that those are
harmful we couldn't prove that so we
didn't put this in the book but the the
traditional definitions of bullying are
actually pretty reasonable I'm
membered exactly it's like there's a
there's like a power differential and
it's chronic you know goes on for it you
know multiple multiple days and
originally there was a actually a threat
of violence it had at least a threat of
violence I think that was the original
definition and then that was expanded
gradually so that doesn't have to be
necessarily threat of violence but it
has expanded so far that like my kids
use the term if if one kid is mean to
another they'll call that bullying and
that's too far so I think you have to
keep your eye on the key features too
far of a kid is mean yeah
so so like on the on the playground for
my daughter
the girls would form these clubs and so
my daughter was in the kitty cat club
like that's what three girls called
themselves and they'd be in a corner and
they'd say oh you can't you know you
can't join us you're not in the kitty
cat club that's mean that's exclusion
right we can't have that right so the so
you'd have to like allow everyone in
your group because you don't want to be
a bully
I don't know that yeah I don't know they
called that bullying but her teacher had
a conversation with them now she didn't
I don't think she exactly ordered them
never exclude so it'd be okay if you use
it as a grounds for discussion but
increased but some schools have even
tried to discourage the existence of
best friends because if you have best
friends you're excluding others that's
Larry it is hilarious but again it's if
you fail to understand that kids are
anti fragile yeah you think
oh my you know there's a rise of anxiety
and depression and girls are cutting
themselves at such high rates you know
we've got it we've got to relieve them
of stress like no that's that's not the
right way to go about it and there
really is an epidemic of kids that grew
up in that era of participation trophies
where everyone won and there's a lot of
parents that don't want to see their
children lose yeah but that's a giant
learning opportunities exactly if you
think the goal is to cultivate
self-esteem directly yeah you're
crippling the kid giving your kid
self-esteem is not beneficial in fact if
kids have high self esteem but it's
unstable
they're actually more likely to be
violent to have more problems you don't
want to build self-esteem what you want
to build is capacities you want to give
them abilities and skills that they do
things that then indirectly give them
self-esteem and compassion right I mean
how do you how do you teach that how do
you teach it well there's lots and lots
more of the biggest things that is
happening in schools whose efforts to
teach compassion I don't know I've not
surveyed the research I don't know if
they work I don't know
so look in general kids learn from
experience but adults want to teach them
directly and so there's all these
efforts to teach compassion I have no
idea if they work but I would think that
doing things together and this is a
point made by Peter gray and expert on
play who co-founded let grow Oracle
wonderful organization that I hope we
can talk about one way that kids learn
compassion is by playing with each other
when there's no adults who can step in
where they have to look out for each
other to keep the game going but when
there are adults present who are
supervising then if there's a conflict
the skills that kids need to learn are
how do you make your case to get the
adult to come in on your side and this
is called moral dependence so one of the
best ways that kids learn compassion
cooperation tolerance teamwork
leadership is free play unsupervised
free play and that's what kids did from
time immemorial certainly throughout the
20th century up until the 1990s mmm like
when you so ask you how old would you
grow up first of all well all over the
place honestly I was born in New Jersey
lived there tall 7 San Francisco from 7
to 11
ok that's to keep here it's 7 to keep
here ok when you lived in San Francisco
were you allowed outside were you
allowed to go to a friend's house could
you and your friends go places yeah I
was a latchkey kid okay yeah my parents
were gone all day and so now they would
be arrested if they did them yeah when I
was 8 years old
I did a magic show on Fisherman's Wharf
by myself fantastic no way would have
dodged a bunch of bullets I almost got
molested there's some guy tried to
some some some guy tried to abduct me
waitwait literally tried to obtain yeah
was in a library some guy tried to get
me to go out to his car with him to
check out some books and some lady
librarian saved me she screamed out
Joseph you get away from that man he
just got out of jail why I ran off yeah
he was super creepy but you know I was
eight I didn't understand what was going
on I just thought he had some good books
yeah okay okay good no right so so this
is a nice example of how we made
progress yeah so so you know a lot what
I'm saying we're saying the book is we
have to let kids out now yes there it
there are dangers out there and so kids
have to learn you actually can talk to
strangers it's not problem to talk to
strangers just never ever go off with
them never under any circumstances you
know but Eve really the problem with
talking to strangers is when you're
eight you don't understand manipulation
you understand you think of adults as
being someone who's got you can count on
okay so so back then we were negligent
in that we just we sent our kids out and
we didn't think about the dangers now
the dangerous are actually extremely low
release the danger of abduction the
number of kids who are abducted in
America each year is on the order of a
hundred now many more are abducted by
the non-custodial parent right but what
you're talking about as a stranger now
there's they're creeps out there there
are guys who masturbate I mean there's
all kinds of creeps out there but
abductions is extraordinarily rare so
yes we have to deal with we have to
teach kids but what happened was there
was a crime wave when you and I were
growing up there was actually a lot of
crime in this country in the 70s and 80s
there was a lot of crime and then the
crime wave begins to end rapidly in the
1990s and just as its ending we changed
our norms to say if a kid is outside and
there's no adult watching him that kid
is likely to be abducted and therefore
the parents are responsible the parents
can be arrested or at least Child
Protective Services should pay them a
visit so just as the crime rate was
ending and rates of all kinds of crazy
violence were plummeting we locked our
kids up and we said you're not going to
be able to have the kind of experience
that you most need in order to become an
independent functioning adult yeah and
so we don't know why depression anxiety
and suicide are skyrocketing for
teenagers especially teenage girls
but the combination of overprotection
and then social media seems to be the
main part of the example so I totally
sympathize with the fact that yeah you
know there are there are risks out there
but the risk of our protection is it
kills a lot more kids
there was a story that I read about I
want to say the kids were 8 and 10 and
they were walking home in New York City
and the police officer stopped them and
talked to him and then eventually
interviewed their parents and said why
your children walking home he's like
because I taught him how to walk home
yeah yeah I showed him how to get home
like this is a this is a valuable thing
to give them the independence to leave
school together they look out for each
other and then they go home together and
you know the cops were making it like
these people were negligent and criminal
and they were saying no I'm trying to
prepare my child for the world so it's a
it's sort of a debate about the
philosophy of raising human beings and
exposing them to a certain amount of
independence and a certain amount of
personal sovereignty that's right and so
this is this is I think the most
important lesson that Greg and I hope
will come from our book is that if you
see the world as dangerous and
threatening and you raise your kids
accordingly you're gonna raise
emotionally stunted kids who are at much
higher risk of depression anxiety and
suicide so stop doing that we got to
stop doing that unfortunately it's hard
to stop doing that because if we let our
kids outside we can be arrested now
that's happens very rarely but it does
happen more more concerning your kids
can be harmed that's extremely rare but
it can happen and for the people that
does happen to the idea that it's
extremely rare is not comforting well
that's right so we think about
probabilities in very ineffective ways
actually do we have those graphs I sent
in some graphs of depression anxiety
rates so if we think that kids are at
risk of harm from letting them out but
we don't see that they're at risk of
harm from keeping them in the wrong
decision right so there's a silent
secret sort of invisible harm of
coddling them exactly and then there's
the small percentage of possible harm
that you could get if you go out into
the world right so okay so you're
raising your kids here what's your
policy on letting them out
man slippery how the hell is your oldest
well I have a grown one who's 22 and
then I have a ten and eight okay
and it's hard man because I don't even
like when they go over on sleepovers
over my friend's house because that's
scary whose problem is that it's
everybody's problem you know it's a boat
I mean the parents I mean we're pretty
selective about the parents but there's
a lot of parents don't pay attention
their kids at all meaning they just tune
out and they get on the phone the kids
are sticking Forks into the fucking
outlets and you know there's there's a
lot of weirdness when it comes to the
styles of that people have been raising
their children what is this this graph
he just pulled up yeah so you know so
depressive episodes yeah so I guess I'll
just narrate it for people who are
listening that watch video you know so
you said before it's like a virus came
out of nowhere and that is sort of what
it's been like so what's happening in
America and I know it's happening the
same in Britain and Canada I haven't
looked at other other places yet haven't
dug into those stats what's happening is
that rates of depression and anxiety
were fairly stable from the you know 90s
through the early 2000s and what you see
here and this is a graph that's in our
book is that the the percentage of kids
aged 12 to 17 in America who met the
criteria for having a major depressive
episode that is they're given a symptom
checklist with nine symptoms and if you
say yes to five of them you know feeling
hopeless and couldn't get out of bed if
you say yes to five or more you're
you're considered to have had a major
depressive episode and what you see is
that the rate for boys is around five
percent and then around 2011 it starts
going up and now it's around seven
percent which is actually a somewhat
substantial increase but as you can see
in the graph the line for girls starts
off higher because girls have more mood
disorders more exciting depression boys
have more antisocial behavior alcoholism
crime and violence but girls turn it's
called an internalizing disordered girls
basically make themselves miserable boys
make other people miserable
the girls rate is higher but it was
stable from you know 2000 or these math
graph from 2005 through 2010 and then
right around 2011 2012 starts going up
and it goes way up to the point where it
goes up from about 12% to now about 20%
of American teenage girls
had a major depressive episode in the
last year one in five so this is huge
okay next slide now let's look just at
college students so this is more
selective these are kids who've made it
into college and what we see is that in
twenty ten and twenty and twenty twelve
when college students were all
Millennials the rates were pretty low
this is do you have a psychological
disorder and they didn't specify that or
they said such as depression and so we
see about two to three percent of the
boys the college men and about five
percent of five to six percent of
college women say yes to that question
that's when it was Millennials but
beginning in 2013 gen Z begins arriving
that's kids born in 1995 gen z begins
arriving and so by 2016 colleges are
almost all Gen Z and the rates shoot up
way up yeah we're looking at these
charts right now and folks who are just
listening the it's like it's a like a
jump ramp for a BMX racer I mean it
really is crazy for women out of nowhere
and it hits a 2012 it goes on a very
sharp upward angle right it goes from
six less than 6% to almost 15% in the
space of four years that's crazy
it's crazy you can't say that that's um
I can't say crazy what can I say fucking
nuts
no because some people might have in
that allergy it's preposterous really
frightening and so this has huge
ramifications lied there you bring up
the next one okay so some people say oh
come on you guys are catastrophizing the
increase isn't real it's just that you
know this generation they're really
comfortable talking about mental illness
and so the fact that they say they're
depressed just means they're comfortable
it doesn't mean that there's an epidemic
I've heard this argument there's just an
argument of recognition rather than of
perfectly reasonable criteria change
perfectly reasonable argument is it true
well let's look at behavior so what this
graph shows is the number of boys out of
a hundred thousand who were admitted to
a hospital every year because they cut
they deliberately harmed themselves it
had to be hospitalized and what you see
here is that there's no change over time
so boys these graphs from 2001 to 2015
the lines are flat for all the different
age groups and just notice at the
highest rates are around 280 out of a
hundred thousand per year that's the
situation for boys next graph bang the
situation for girls is really really
different
so the averages are higher so self-harm
has always been more of a girl thing
than a boy thing but you know boys are
except for suicide
okay that's but that exactly we'll get
to that that's right that's next so if
we look at self-harm what you see here
is that the rates were fairly stable up
until 2009 and then bang just as in the
last latest same thing the rates for
girls go shooting up so the rate for 15
to 19 year old girls is up 62 percent
since 2009 now notice the rate for the
Millennials that is the rate for the
oldest girls aged 20 to 24 that's when
we have 17 percent so whatever it
happened it's not affecting the
Millennials it's affecting Gen Z I think
wait is there one hit the advanced key
because I think there's one number
missing there okay I'll just go forward
okay the number oh there it is there it
is
the rate for the youngest girls check
that out now the youngest court these
are 10 to 14 year old girls these are
preteens okay they didn't used to cut
themselves they used to have very low
rates but bang beginning in 2010 it
shoots up it's up 189 percent it is
nearly tripled in the last five or six
years what's the wrong
we don't know for sure but the reason
why so because of the huge sex
difference the leading candidate and the
timing look at that timing is social
media so if you look at what happened in
this country and all around the world
Facebook opens up to the world in 2006
you know you don't have to be a college
student but very few teenagers have a
Facebook account 2006 2007 the iPhone
comes out but it's very expensive and
very few teenagers have one by 2010 2011
around half of American teenagers have
an iPhone or Samsung they have a
smartphone and they have access to
social media in middle school because
even though for Facebook and Instagram I
think
mage is and was 13 you know I mean my
son is 12 a lot of his friends have
Instagram you just lie so middle school
kids are now getting on social media by
2010 2011 you've got a lot of them and
that's what I think is the main cause of
this because social media does not
really affect boys very much but man
does it affect girls why is a so if you
look at so a couple of reasons first
look at the nature of aggression within
the sexes boys bullying is physical okay
boys are physically dominating and then
the risk is that they're going to get
punched okay so you give everybody an
iPhone what do they do with it
games and porn they don't use it to hurt
each other boys your toys that's right
it doesn't affect their bullying but
girls aggression the girls are actually
as aggressive his boys research from the
80s and 90s on this if you include
relational aggression girls don't bully
each other by threatening to punch each
other in the face girls bully each other
by damaging the other girls social
relationships spreading rumors spreading
lies spreading a doctored photograph
saying bad things excluding them it's
relational aggression and so it's always
been really hard to be a middle school
student it's always been harder to be a
middle school girl than a middle school
boy okay so beginning around 2010-2011
we throw in this brand new thing into
the mix okay girls here's this beautiful
thing in your hand and here's all these
programs where you can damage anyone's
social relationships any time of the day
or night with deniability from an
anonymous account go at it girls and so
the nature of girls bullying is hyper
charged by social media and smartphones
that's one mechanism the other two
mechanisms are the social comparison
because it's always been hard to be a
teen girl emerging with Beauty standards
and impossible beauty standards and when
we were kids you had impossible beauty
standards that these models were all
doctored up and then Photoshop okay so
you've got these impossible beauty
standards out there but beginning with
social media in especially in recent
years your own friends can put on a
filter and Instagram to make their lips
bigger their skin cleaner their eyes
bigger so your own friends are more
beautiful than they are in real life you
feel uglier
so that's the social comparison of
beauty and then probably the biggest
single one is the fear of missing out
the fear of being left out so all kids
are subject to this everyone's concerned
about whether they're included or
whether they're they're excluded but
girls are much more sensitive and so
suddenly when everybody is tracking each
other's who was invited who's there and
especially any program in which a girl
puts something out and then waits to see
what other people say about it that is
what's really damaging I think we again
let me stress we don't know for sure
there are some experiments on this but
it's mostly correlational stuff we're
talking about here correlational data
but the overall experience of being a
girl who was born in 1995 or later and
got this stuff in middle school is
different from being a girl born in 1990
let's say we didn't get this stuff till
college are you concerned that this is a
trend that as technology becomes more
and more invasive it and with these new
technologies as they emerge that this is
gonna be worse yes yes but it doesn't
have to be the soap so I think in the
last two years we're really waking up to
this the founders of this technology
it's really interesting so first of all
it's important to note as many people
have read the a lot of the creators of
this technology do not let their kids
have it so they know that these things
were made to be addictive they're made
to grab eyeballs and not let go so
that's one thing we all should keep that
in mind that the makers of this are wary
of it second they've gotten more and
more addictive as they've gotten better
and better as they've evolved so they're
getting more and more and for tonight is
an example of you know extremely
addictive game and it does but so even
when you if you've ever been to a a
casino and you've seen kids you've seen
people sitting at those machines like
zombies just you know hour after hour
pulling that crank because there were
psychologists working out the variable
reinforcement schedule for the gambling
companies psychologists they're helping
companies manipulate users and that's
happening to our kids too they're
they're manipulated to stay on the
device so once we're beginning to
realize this the nature of these
technologies the fact that what is good
for adults may
be terrible for 12 year olds 10 year
olds and once we realize that these
things are so attractive that they crowd
out all that other healthy activities
like playing outside playing with groups
of friends once we realize that I think
and I hope we'll get some reasonable
norms and what I'd like to propose this
is fantastic to be able to talk to so
many people I'd like to propose is if
you have kids especially if you have
kids under about 16 please do what you
can to talk with other parents and
especially with the principal of any
school as you know and say we need some
sensible norms because we can't solve
this problem by ourselves so I want to
keep my kids off social media but my son
says well most of my friends are have
Instagram accounts now if it was every
friend and he was the only one who was
excluded he would be really hard for me
to stick to my guns I would do it would
be really hard whereas if it was only a
few of his friends and most of them
weren't it would be so easy and I heard
this from parents over and over I don't
want my kid on social media but I don't
want her to be left out yeah and so if
the principal would just say parents
please this is getting this is getting
out of hand this is harming kids look at
the data look at the suicide rates look
at the look at the self-harm rates we've
got to do something what do you do a
couple of things that's I think it's
pretty pretty a couple of pretty simple
norms one all devices out of the bedroom
buy a set time at least half an hour
before bed there is no reason why kids
should have an iPhone or a computer or
screen in their bedroom because so many
kids are attracted to it they'll check
their status overnight and it interrupts
their sleep we can't be having teenagers
who have interrupted sleep that there's
no benefit from that gave my daughter a
Fitbit my ten-year-old too you know
monitor all sorts of different thing she
was interested in it so we got her one
for Christmas and she slept five and a
half hours the first night she had it on
because we could check like what are you
doing she's checking the 15 what's
what's going on him like this is not
good like you can't wear this now and
she's like trying to make all these
arguments to keep but I'm like listen
she's it's not distracting me I go if
it's not distracting you
then you shouldn't care if you don't
have it on right because then it's not
gonna mean anything yeah and then
there's like this like a shit like she
got checkmated these things are so
addictive
addictive I had one of those goddamn
watches those Apple watches I had it on
for one day and whilst doing the podcast
it kept vibrating huh I'm like oh my god
I'm getting text messages on my wrist my
wrist so wait and your brain is all
developed yeah well okay okay but
imagine if you're a 10 or 11 years I've
seen it yeah you put something out there
and you want to know did you know did
bill like it yet you know why did why
did Mary like bills but not my like yeah
so so that's the rule number one you
gotta get devices out of the bedroom
give them an old-fashioned alarm clock
let him wake up an alarm cuts one to no
social media till high school there is
no reason why kids in middle school or
elementary school should have Instagram
Facebook snapchat any of those I agree
they can text each other like when we
were kids he'd call each other on the
phone that's fine they can text each
other but there should be no social
media till high school because it's a
it's a social dilemma it that we can't
solve alone we can only solve it if
there's an agreement among parents and
guidance from the principal please
parents don't give your kid Instagram
account my only concern is that they're
not going to learn how to mitigate it or
how to navigate it rather if we say
nothing till high school and then when
they get in high school then they
they're confronted with it I would like
them to have some skills or at least
some understanding of what's going on
now wait a sec so so I'm not saying
don't let them have access to these
machines I'm not saying don't let them
know I know exactly what you're saying
you're saying those how social media
yeah and how about this the bullying
that takes place in middle school is
primitive and destructive and the
bullying that takes place in late high
school is a lot less and is not really a
way why do you think that is well Mills
like middle school kids are just coming
into this there's some research sown
gene twangy has a book called ijen and
she has some data in there that suggests
that when you get social media in
college it doesn't seem to harm you but
when you got it in your preteen years it
does hmm and so and she thinks that it's
in part the nature of the bullying is
such so you know sure we want them to
know how to deal with this but you know
they can learn it pretty quickly when
they're 15 it's not like they need a
running start from 11 to 15 right so I
just see no good whatsoever coming from
social media in middle school and I see
a lot of harm if you want your look I go
around the country I talk about this
they're almost the rule now is when
someone in someone says oh my daughter's
in high school and you know she's had it
and I say how is she doing does she have
anxiety problems the answer is almost
always yes mm-hmm and if it's not her
then her friends are all crippled by or
suffering from anxiety so I think we
have to you know you have to wake cost
and benefits a few years ago we didn't
know for sure about the costs now we do
yeah no you're making total sense I'm
purely playing devil's advocate and I'm
on the same page with you I don't give
my kids don't have phones and my
ten-year-old it's shocking how many
girls in her class have phones right and
Facebook accounts and Instagram accounts
and they it I'll say it right now her
friends are at higher risk than she is
of having an anxiety disorder of being
hospitalized because they're going to
cut themselves and ultimately of suicide
yeah it's so common and it's most of the
kids in school now and when they get
older than 10 the the number increases
like parents hold out for as long as
they can but as they get older and the
kids want phones man everybody wants a
phones right so let me put in a plug so
I gave my son
so I'm saying two contradictory things
one is I'm saying we gotta let our kids
out gotta start letting them out at
least by age eight at least to go with
their friends to playground stores we
gotta start doing this and at the same
time I'm saying that the technology has
some negative effects okay if you're
gonna send your kid out I totally get
what you were saying about your either
panic like the first time that we let
our son out in the park and then he
didn't come home right when he said like
and it was real panic yeah in part so
two things one is we have to get used to
that because he always does come home
but secondly I didn't realize this when
I gave him an iPhone my old iPhone
there's a great little product the my
pattern of Verizon no they don't make it
it something LG makes it but it's a
gizmo or gizmo gadget and so it's as
simple it's a watch it's a it's a big
clunky thing but my daughter loves
wearing it because it's kind of like a
James Bond Dick Tracy thing it's a watch
you press a button you turn it on you
can call three phone numbers that's it
three four yeah so she can call and so
so now I can send her out to get bagels
on Sunday morning she walks about six
blocks in New York City it's incredibly
safe how old is she she is nine so oh
yeah so and she is a much more
independent confident girl because of it
and she is proud of this fact that she
is a free-range kid
he can walk around our neighborhood I
mean we live in Greenwich Village it's
incredibly safe so she can go get bagels
and it you know look she has no sense of
direction so a couple times when she's
been out doing there and she gets lost
she just presses a button daddy I don't
know where I am and if she's calm and I
said we've talked it through and I can
track her that's the the reassuring
thing I can see on a screen roughly
where she is so I can say you know what
do you see and I said come back this way
and she always knows how she gets in
trouble just walk home and start again
yeah whew what are you thinking Joe all
right what's what's that facial
expression nothing is just children
wandering around on their own yeah has
always happened mm-hmm yeah and as they
have to do at some point I know but
listen look at how you're even reacting
to this what but you're you're you're
beaming up and you're adding a motion to
your voice and you're smiling yes so
it's everything's gonna be fine
everything you're doing this and sort of
you're not just reassuring you're
selling it you're right
I am selling it because we as a society
bought into a set of beliefs that are
based on falsehoods the risk to our kids
is miniscule someone calculated at
present rates of abduction by strangers
if you put your kid in a car and you go
into a store and you leave the windows
open your kids sitting there in the
parking lot you'd have to stay in that
store for 700,000 years before your kid
is likely to be abducted well it does
not depend on what neighborhood you live
in I suppose so
yeah but still the point is that there's
hardly any actual abduction and so
actually this brings up a really
important point I'd like to say you one
of the sticking points here is that
we're afraid to let our kids out because
bad things can happen to us mm-hmm as
well as to the kids sure and so it hoped
that would be the least of your concerns
so number one concern would be your
children's safety but are you getting in
trouble that hope would be the least of
your concerns not the least of them
because I am selling something I am
selling the idea that that they're
gigantic rise in mental illness of
teenagers is caused in part because
we've all protected them
we have denied them the experiences of
independence they need to develop their
basic social sense and so I am selling
idea that we've we've totally botched
this and we need to undo it and a big
piece of that is we need to be removed
from the fear of legal prosecution and
so Utah this day
Utah passed a year and a half ago a year
ago yeah they passed the first free
range kids bill which says it puts into
state law it says I forget what the
exact terms but the gist of it is a
parent cannot be considered to be
negligent just by having the kids be
unsupervised so if you send your kids
out to the park you know you have to use
judge obviously if there's a pattern of
neglect that's a totally different story
right but the mere fact that as you just
said the story about well I'm teaching
my kids to go outside I know that
they're outside I told them to go
outside you can't be arrested for that
right and until we have legal
protections it's gonna be very hard for
anyone to do it because they you know
the risk is you could be drawn into
months and months of supervision your
kids can actually be taken away from you
if you give them independence in some
parts of the country it's interesting
that you thought would be so progressive
about that um yeah I don't know the
history behind it it's such a safe place
it's one of the reasons why that could
be yeah so a big part of this is we
don't trust each other anymore
right you know if you don't trust your
neighbors then you're you're not gonna
let them out you're not let your kids
out one of the things you talk about in
your book about happiness it's really
interesting is cognitive therapy Prozac
and meditation those those three factors
being enormous aids in acquiring a
certain amount of happiness
you know I've found it very refreshing
that you you also added in Prozac you
added in SSRIs because there's a lot of
people that seem to take this approach
with antidepressants in particular that
they're over prescribed which I think
they probably are and that they do more
harm than good which is debatable but
the fact that they do do good I have had
two close friends that were in really
bad places and they got on an SSRI and
it cleaned them up and they eventually
wean themselves off of it and now very
productive and very happy but they were
in a place in their life where they like
my friend Ari put it best
he's like my brain was broken
and he goes I needed to fix it and I
fixed it and then once it was fixed I
realized it was fixed and then I weaned
myself off that's right yeah so in
chapter 2 of the happiness hypothesis so
the book is based on ten ancient ideas
and one of the ancient ideas is the
world is but we deal the world is the
world is what we deem it it with our
perceptions we make the world the world
is not an objective thing we don't react
to the world as an objective fact we are
react to it through filters and one of
the major personality traits is sort of
positivity negativity or overall
happiness yeah some people look at the
world they see threats other people look
at the world is the opportunities and if
you take a bunch of kids for five six
year old kids and you put some weird toy
in front of it makes noise some of the
kids are gonna go towards it and say oh
what's that some are going to move away
like oh this could be threatening and
from that behavior you can predict not
with a lot of accuracy but you can do
better than chance who's gonna go to the
high school prom who is going to be
successful in in any sort of social
endeavors because some people's brains
are set to fear and avoidance when your
brain is set to see more threats you
have a bias towards interpreting things
negatively and if the world is
incredibly dangerous well that might be
adaptive but if the world's incredibly
physically safe as ours is you're losing
a lot of opportunities you're going to
be less successful and so the point of
that chapter was there are ways you can
change your filter even though this is
highly heritable identical twins reared
apart tend to be pretty similar on these
traits but you can change your filters
and so that chapter two of the happiness
hypothesis shows the three main ways of
changing your filter so it was a
meditation cognitive therapy and SSRIs
and all three work there's a lot of
evidence for all three meditation has
only good effects it's wonderful but
it's hard that is I've assigned it to my
classes and most undergraduates if they
have to do it for a few weeks most of
them stopped a few continue and get
benefits cognitive therapy is easier it
when I've assigned students to do it
most have success I have a real hard
time with that phrase it's hard
the medications hard I really do
I don't think it's hard you find it easy
to sit for 20 minutes not easy but it's
not hard coal mining is hard okay you
know I mean we're doing something you
hate is hard yeah this is just
complicated I don't think it's hard
you're right let me use a different word
meditation is such that the
non-compliance rate ends up being quite
high well there's a massive people have
problem with a few things one discipline
- avoiding discomfort this is a people
is one of the reasons why people don't
like exercise and it's also really just
starting exercise because the actual
exercise itself is on two different kind
of pleasure once you develop a habit
it's a letter yes this is I think what
you have with meditation it's this
procrastination this your brain tries to
find ways to avoid whatever difficult
especially you know some strange way if
it's been shown to be beneficial things
that have been shown to be beneficial
your brain wants to avoid I do not know
why that is but things you get I have a
theory that especially when you're
growing up that you associate work with
school work jobs so anytime you have
these thoughts in your head you're like
oh it's that thing it's one of those
things that I don't want to do I want to
go play video games one play for tonight
why don't have to do the work but doing
the work really it's just a matter of
how you interface with it how you how
you view it and weird it's many many
years of conditioning that this is
mundane dreary boring horseshit when you
could be out playing yeah fun stuff no
that's right there's a there's a great
little scene in The Simpsons where Bart
is on a video game and he's shooting
down state capitals and he's shooting
something appears like oh there's
Hellena you know there's a you know
Springfield and then at a certain point
he says wait I'm learning and he throws
it it's really what is what it is I mean
it's it's kind of amazing that we have
done such a shitty job teaching kids
that we make school out to be this
everything that you're they have like a
deep avoid music well that's right and
that's and this is Peter Gray's point
Peter gray this wonderful development of
psychologist at Boston College who
thinks that schools are are not designed
with kids learning in mind
kids learn best from interacting with
the world from experience we get
experience from feedback and so we make
learning painful yeah so an example
would be you know like how do you learn
to climb a tree you know when we were
kids you'd climb a tree and you know you
know that feeling when you go out on a
branch and a certain point you just get
the sense that it's about to crack yeah
you pull back okay now imagine that you
had a hundred kids who learn how to
climb trees by climbing trees you take
another hundred kids you get in tree
climbing class but you never let them
climb a tree okay but you you know you
bring in the world's best experts on
tree climbing and they teach these kids
how to climb trees and then you put them
all out you get trees to climb you know
in general I would put my money on the
kids who actually learned from
experience
oh for sure and so you know the general
principle again is that well actually
here I'll bring up one other with idea
from happiness hypothesis I find it
really helpful to think of the mind as
being divided in two parts like a rider
on an elephant and the rider is our
conscious reasoning it's the little guy
up on top who has language and it's what
we're aware of but the elephant is the
other 99% of our minds and that's almost
all automatic processes it's intuitions
its emotions its habits phobias all
sorts of things and so child development
can't be just training the rider for 18
years wisdom knowledge skill competence
those those have to involve training the
elephant and when the two work together
then you get the best results and I
think we we've just what we've done in
America especially is we've said we want
our kids to be really good in math so
we're gonna teach the math earlier let's
give the math in kindergarten but
there's no evidence that that helps if
there's no evidence that teaching
academic skills earlier will make them
advance to a higher level at the end
what they most need when they're young
is to play and we've taken that away
from them we've given them too many
after-school lessons you're in too much
supervision of their play
yeah that's a saddest thing in the world
is when my kids come home and they're
really frustrated because they have
homework you know 10 year olds that have
hours of homework you're at school all
day that's right and I don't know how to
address that you bring to the teachers
and say hey you guys are fuckin up even
though I've never taught anyone ever in
class I'm telling you you're doing it
wrong yeah so you know it's a it's a
case where you certainly need the
research and the research we cover some
of the research in chapters 8 & 9 of the
coddling the American mind and as far as
we can tell the research seems to show
that they're essentially no benefits to
doing homework in kindergarten and first
grade maybe a little bit of like you
know they learn to organize their time
but barely any by fifth or sixth grade
there's more evidence that homework is
beneficial but in between there it
really isn't clear what's really clear
is that play free play is beneficial so
so it's hard for you as just one parent
to say hey don't do this but I think as
part of a larger program to say our kids
are being messed up look at these graphs
look at the rates of anxiety and
depression and you know when I talk I
guys talk about the book all around
you're talking at people now come up to
me and they'll say like I'm a guitar
teacher I've been teaching guitar for 20
years and suddenly like just the last
few years
I give them negative feedback and they
crack so everyone's beginning to notice
that our kids are frail and nobody wants
this and so I think we're gonna find
people more open to changing what we're
doing well I hope so it's also it's got
to be so incredibly difficult to cater a
lesson where you have you know 30 or 40
kids in the classroom with varying
abilities and varying interests and
you're sort of catering unless we're
trying to excite them about astronomy or
whatever it is you're teaching and and
get it through into their heads and make
it seem fun you know yeah and still
teach them yeah yeah and then still set
them up would to have a certain amount
of discipline if you're going to enter
into the workforce you're gonna have to
do things you don't necessarily want to
do while you're doing them that's right
and if we're and now you add to that the
decline of authority of tea
and principles and you add to that the
sense of empowerment that parents have
to fine-tune or control and be involved
the you know there are stories now about
parents who come to the lunchroom
because they want to see their kid at
lunch where you know we have principals
and teachers where once you know if the
principal or if the teacher gives a bad
grade the parents would assume that it
was deserved I think there's more of a
tendency in reason and that's decade or
two of two parents who are very
competitive or concerned about getting
to get into college to complain so if
you have I don't know how general these
these trends are I don't want to
overestimate this but if you have a
general decline of authority of teachers
and principals now they have less leeway
to give negative experiences so if
someone does if someone fails to turn in
a paper because they were responsible
and you say sorry F yeah that could be a
good learning experience right it could
be but devastating for their GPA and
that's right so probably a good thing
though it's from the understanding
consequences right exactly
what about teaching children how to
think and why is that not a massive part
of the curriculum because I think that's
something that I really had to learn on
my own and I think it's one of the most
valuable things that I ever learned but
as I got older I always thought why
didn't I learn this in school okay a
couple of reasons so when in the 1980s
there was a huge emphasis on teaching
critical thinking and we don't hear
about that anymore because nobody found
a way to do it so it's not that easy one
of the things I cover in the happiness I
pop in that righteous mind is we're all
designed for confirmation bias we're all
really good at confirming what we
already believe and so it's very hard to
train anyone to disconfirm their own
hypotheses what we really need to think
better is the right system the right
community we actually need critics so
actually here I brought you a copy of a
little book that I co-produced so this
is John Stuart Mill wrote one of the
most important books in the Western
tradition on Liberty chapter two of on
Liberty is the best set of arguments
ever made for free speech for why it is
that we need to let people talk and
challenge and criticize even if we think
they're wrong
we get smarter from having to rebut them
whereas if we shut them down if we have
blasphemy laws we get Dumber because we
never actually face tests of what we
believe so this set of arguments in
Chapter two of on Liberty is timeless I
mean we need like mill anticipated every
argument that we hear now about why we
need to shut that person down and not
let that person talk and so I thought
wow we need to get this book back out
because the college students don't read
this anymore
and it's a little bit difficult the text
so I I happen to be friends with with
Richard Reeves who was a mill scholar
he's at Brookings Institution and and he
called he said Jonathan I love what
you're doing a heterodox Academy if I
can be of help let me know so I said
well actually Richard would you co edit
this edition of Mills second chapter and
he said yes I'd love to
so he made the selections we worked
together like to reduce it it's only
seven thousand words so it's easy to
read and then this wonderful artist Dave
Ciccarelli stopped by my office he said
I love what you're doing Hydrox Academy
if I can be of help let me know and I
said well actually could you read this
text find Mills metaphors because Mill
uses a lot of wonderful metaphors and
illustrate them and so if you tested
over which is that camera okay so what
Dave did was he took he took Mills
metaphors and here so you know we've got
these like amazing you know graphic
cartoon type images of the dynamics of
what happens when we shame people mmm
because Mill was not concerned about
government censorship that wasn't a big
deal in London in 1859 it was social
censorship just as it is today so you
know so Ciccarelli families made these
beautiful illustrations of Mills point
and so we think that this book if this
book was assigned in every high school
for seniors or every incoming freshman
class we think that people would think a
lot better so you want to know how to do
critical thinking read this book and
then seek out your opponents seek out
your critics seek out the people who can
do for you what you can't do for
yourself which is challenge your ideas
are you concerned with this the trend
that we're seeing now with social media
of I mean I get removing blatant racism
and sexism and in certain really awful
types of behavior
certain social media sites but at a
certain point in time it becomes an
ideological battle and people that lean
one way or another want that other side
to be silenced I'm seeing this way more
from the left which is very disturbing
to me because growing up my family was
very liberal you know and I said my
formative years in San Francisco I was
always around hippies and I always felt
like the people that were on the left
with the open-minded educated ones who
were concerned with the future of
discourse and and humans developing the
ability to really flesh out ideas and
work their way through them which only
happens through 3/4 through real free
speech giving people the ability to
express themselves and then deciding
whether or not you agree with that and
why you disagree or agree and then
speaking your mind and then everybody
works it out together this this is not
necessarily the trend that we're seeing
today that's right that's right so first
let me just say you can get this book
for free at least you can download the
PDF if you go to heterodox academy org
slash mil or you can get a $3 Kindle if
you go to Amazon look this up it's $3
for the Kindle or you can buy the art
book they're too awesome so that's so
cool that you're doing that and allowed
people to download it for free too we
want to get the word out we think these
are the ideas that are needed so onto
your question so in part there's an
empirical question here which I don't
know the answer to in Europe they ban in
most of they ban hate speech so or you
know Holocaust denial there's certain
things that are illegal it's a crime and
in America we don't now it's an
empirical question meaning it's open to
actual investigation does banning it
push it underground and let the people
feel that they are victims of being
silenced things come back stronger or is
some like the best disinfectant I don't
know the answer to that I think in
general I think the American system has
worked better but I don't know they're
scholars who could who could address
that as for what is happening to the
left is the left more intolerant I agree
with you that you would think the left
would be more open and in my research on
left-right the left is generally higher
an openness to experience the idea of
dissent dissent is patriotic these
or leftist ideas not not greatest idea
so the left should be more open problem
is any group that any group that loses
variety that loses diversity any group
in which everybody thinks the same is at
risk of turning it into an ideology of
turning to a religion and then you lose
the ability to think straight and now if
somebody so you know when I was in
college yeah you know everybody sort of
leaned left but there was there were
conservatives there were some
conservative professors like I've been
exposed to some conservative ideas but
now if you're in a college that has
essentially no conservatives that will
put out ideas and you encounter one now
it's much more painful it's much more
shocking again it's like it's like you
have a peanut allergy to ideas that are
not your groups right and we want so we
it's terrible if we're putting young
people in systems that are basically
giving them ideological peanut allergies
mmm that's a great way to look at it
I definitely agree with that in terms of
young people but I'm concerned with
grown adults as well III think that the
way a my personal opinion the way to con
the way to deal with bad speech is
better speech with the way that would
the way to deal with shitty ideas is to
make those ideas look shitty through
debate it's not to silence the person
that's talking this is one of the more
confusing things about people that are
pulling alarms on speakers and and and
shouting them down while they're talking
you have an opportunity with that
person's in front of you to listen to
their idea and there should be an
opportunity to to debate that idea to
form your own opinion and have a really
good argument against it and to present
that argument and to have people see
both sides and this is what learning is
supposed to be all about especially
recognizing the flaws and ideas
recognizing bias recognizing the lack of
critical thinking or recognizing
critical thinking and applauding it I
will agree with you depending on the
context what I mean is if you have a
group of people interacting with certain
norms or laws
that that ban intimidation and violence
that make people have some
accountability for how they the style
that they use to argue sure if you if
you if you lie if yes
threaten something your reputation
something bad will come back to you yes
so adding intimidation and violence are
probably the most important that's where
those are and so within a university I
totally agree with you now if you look
at the country as a whole or the
internet as a whole and you have a
culture war going on or you have a sense
of us versus them yes and you have all
kinds of bad actors like the Russians
discovered you know before then that
were there was the you know the fake
news people who discovered they make
fake articles and you know on the left
and the right and just turned out that
actually the right would click on the
more so they went that way there if
there are people who are gaming the
system then your idea which is Mills
idea there are I think there are
conditions in which it wouldn't work I'm
not sure about that but I think there
are six conditions in which that logic
would not work and so one thing that I'm
very concerned about I don't see why it
is that we can ever let people start an
account where there's no verification of
who they are not saying you can't have
anonymous accounts like you know I
understand their reasons why you'd want
to be able to post without your real
name that's fine right but if you make a
death threat or what you know what
happens a lot is like you know there's
research showing if you post something
as a woman versus a man as a woman
you're gonna get a lot more rape threats
and things like that if you if you post
as a black person or white person you
get a lot more racist stuff so at least
the platforms should always know that
you're a person and that you can your
account can be shut down if you if you
talk this way because I think that there
are so many people saying such nasty
stuff that it feeds back and changes
people's willingness to speak up right
my concern is not necessarily free
speech per se it's free speech as a
means to an end and that end is that we
as individuals are kind of stupid and we
only get smart if you put us together in
the right way where we can challenge
each other that's what university should
do and when we have a callout culture
we're walking on eggshells we can no
longer do that and in the marketplace of
ideas I think it's really interesting to
see those two things play out the one
the benefit of being anonymous that you
could talk about things without fear of
retribution you could
talk about things without fear of losing
your job and controversial ideas
especially in this day and age that you
know might not really be that
controversial to you or at least
arguable to you but that you could get
shamed for it and get people could take
your words out of context and you could
get in real trouble so there's a benefit
of anonymity but on the other hand when
you're looking at slurs attacks threats
stalking all that stuff it would be nice
if we knew who is behind all this
absolutely yeah so that's a case whereby
I don't think it's a pendulum I do think
that there will be some technological
solutions and maybe some social norms so
that people who critique in a certain
way where it's lers and it's guilt by
association those people will in some
sense lose points lose credibility be
downgraded my big word for 2019 is
nuance that most things are complicated
least the things we're talking about are
common yeah and anybody who can say you
know I think you're right about X but
wrong about Y like that should be a
hundred bonus points yeah like that is
one of the essential skills of of
sincerely engaging with people and
anybody who uses guilt by association
loses a hundred points so like one thing
I'm finding because I'm a centrist I
only vote for Democrats at never voted
for Republican but I consider myself
philosophically to be a centrist and now
people will say that I'm alt right
adjacent you know that's like my
favorite one the adjacency that's a
that's a wonderful I get that one
because I've had people on the podcast
that are right-wingers yeah so you
should say to them really say on social
media is anybody who makes an adjacency
argument is McCarthy adjacent that is if
you're making a guilt by association
argument if you say an adjacency
argument that's guilt by association
anybody does guilt by association is
like McCarthy therefore their McCarthy
adjacent she said that clear but it is a
good argument that's a good definition
of what you're saying it's it's a screwy
thing that people are doing by this alt
right adjacent thing well you know and
someone wrote a whole chart of like
people interacting with people and
connecting these people because they've
had communication with these B
so that somehow or another these things
are all related like boy that is a yeah
that's a squirrely argument no but but
but actually this is the way the human
mind works right we have to see is that
we evolved to do this kind of religion
with witchcraft believes and voodoo yes
there's all you know there's all these
patterns that recur all around the world
and the miracle is that there have been
societies such as ours that develop
norms of science norms of discourse
norms of civility norms of toleration
and free speech where the exceptions and
it's precious and it's easily lost I
think I fear do you think that it's also
this the newfound ability to communicate
that we're experiencing because the
internet leads us to a lot of this sort
of sloppy
arguing and categories I categorizing of
humans and ideas that it's just we're
just not used to these tools yet yes but
it's not so
so I approach this as a social
psychologist so most of the commentary
about this comes from cognitive
psychologists or people who talk about
the information bubbles the filter
bubbles as though you know I have my
ideas in my head and if I'm exposed only
to ideas from here then I'm going to
have an incorrect balance of ideas so to
look at the information flow obviously
these tools have vastly changed the
information flow mostly for the better
you can google anything at any time
so mostly for the better but we have
this problem of unbalanced like you know
you eat only sugar something so you have
an unbalanced diet okay fine those are
problems I'm a social psychologist I
think the social dynamics problems are
vastly bigger vastly more dangerous and
they are that if whatever I say or
whether I will agree with you or whether
I'll even press the like button I'm
thinking what's gonna happen to me who's
gonna nail me for it and there are
people who go through my Twitter feed
and they look at what I liked months or
years ago and they'll say well he like
this or he followed this but yeah I
follow people on the Albright and the
far left and communists and fat I mean
yeah I study this stuff yeah but the
idea that you could be somehow a be you
know blamed for having some connection
this is what normal human people normal
human beings do with this guilt by
association and we have to rise above it
we have to call it out when we see it
it were and realize you know what we all
need critics we all need to engage with
a variety of viewpoints that's what John
Stuart Mill said that's what common
sense will tell you and if we have
institutions that don't expose students
to a variety of viewpoints it's possible
that they are making them less wise when
they graduate than they were when they
arrived well this is Jonathan we just
cranked through two hours and I want to
thank you for illuminating these ideas
and for your great books and and thank
you for coming on the pile what a
pleasure you want to do it again so know
what's do it again thank you I love
thank you so much bye everybody
[Music]